Well we're finally ready to begin sculpting.
It's always good to spend the time to build up a solid base mass before you begin sculpting.
And I think we're there I think this is pretty good.
We've got the polygons of our mesh generally the same size.
There are of course always going to be spotted ones up around the head but other than that generally
speaking we've got them relatively proportional.
We've established the proportions and scale of our character and we've provided edge loops in places
that we are going to need them like around the hips and the face.
So let's go ahead and prepare for sculpting now.
What I want to do is hit the tab key and go into object mode and in Object mode here I can come over
to the modifiers panel and I want to apply my mirror modifier.
Now I've got clipping turned on to ensure that the center line of the character is merged together.
So with that I'm going to hit apply.
Now one thing I want to mention here is you may have noticed that I've been saving in versions as I
go through this I'm going to file save as and I'm saving these in multiple versions.
That's a good idea because as you get to certain points in the process you do these kind of big things
like applying the mirror modifier or changing something drastically.
And those big changes can sometimes cause a problem in the computer so I always think not about if the
computer crashes.
What will I do.
But when the computer crashes what will I do.
So I always save versions of a project as I go.
All right we've applied our mirror modify our So now he is all one piece.
If I went in and selected say a vertex here and moved it around you can see it would not be mirrored
over on the other side.
So he is all one piece and is not being kept symmetrical now.
So our sculp tools are down here where object mode in edit mode are right here.
Here's our sculped mode.
And if I click that you can see I get tools over here.
Now look at what this set up here when I switched to scoped mode.
That's a great reminder for me.
Let me switch back to object mode and back to sculpt mode and see if it pops up again.
Object has uniform scale sculpting may be unpredictable.
That is a wonderful little reminder for me.
Let's go take care of that.
I'm going to go go back to object mode and select my character here and I'm going to press the end key
and notice that the scale is nonuniform.
In other words it isn't all the same it isn't all ones we really want this.
And the rotation to be zeros and ones a lot of Blender's tool sets like the U-V mapping tool set and
the sculpting tools that rely on global scale and rotation to do their jobs and we can make their job
easier I guess if we apply the scale and rotation here.
So what I'm going to do with the character in Object mode I'm going to press control a.
And here we can apply transformations.
So I'm going to apply the rotation and scale like that.
The pivot point or object origin of the character is still here at the hips where we created that first
cube.
That's fine but we can also move and move that point down to the center of the grid which I think ultimately
will be more useful when we rig the character and animated et cetera et cetera.
So I'm going to ensure that the cursor is at the center of the grid by pressing shift s and clicking
cursor to center and then I'm going to come over here to the Tools tab and click on set origin and move
the origin to the 3D cursor.
So now we have our scale and rotation applied.
We have our pivot point down into the center of the grid.
Let's try now to go back to the sculped tools and see if we get any issues.
I'm going to press the End key to close that panel and I'm going to switch from object to scopes mode
and we don't get a little warning up here anymore which is good.
Now over on the left hand side are all the sculp tools we can click on this icon and see all the different
brushes we have access to the normal one is the sculpt draw we'll be using the clay strips quite a bit
here at the beginning to rough out the basic forms and we'll also be using the GRABBE as well as the
smooth and the Flaten and the pinch will be using other brushes as well.
But those are probably the ones we're going to use right up front now that we've turned off or applied
the mirror modifier we need to ensure that our strokes at least at the beginning are going to be symmetrical.
So I'm going to scroll down here and under Sematary I want to make sure that the X mirror is on.
Now what I'd like to do is go ahead and begin adding resolution or subdivisions to the model so that
we can begin building up our forms to do that.
I'm going to come over here to the modifiers panel and click add modifier and this time instead of a
mere modifier I'm going to add a multi resolution modifier and what it does is it allows us to add subdivisions
by clicking the subdivide button here and then with those subdivisions added we can move up and down
the subdivision layers as we sculpt.
So if I click this subdivide button one time you can see it adds resolution it adds polygons to the
mesh.
If I hit the Z key you can kind of see them here in in the wireframe.
Now if I hit it again you can see it adds even more and this is how we'll be adding resolution to our
model.
You can see up here that we're up to fourteen thousand faces.
If I turn off the display of the modifier here you can see we go down to eight hundred or almost 900
faces.
So we're actually adding polygons to the model here.
I'm going to click so divide one more time and now you can see it's getting smoother and the polygons
are getting much smaller.
So if I hit the Z key you can see that it's pretty dense.
Now I can come up and down the subdivisions stack or Lares here by clicking on the arrow by the sculped.
So this is what we'll see in the sculped window here.
And this is what we'll see in the actual render if we rendered out the model that I'm going to move
this back up to three here.
Now I can't go any higher until I click on the subdivide button again to create a new subdivision level
to sculpt on this.
I'm going to be using a way come into this pen and tablet.
You don't need to spend a lot on a tablet but it is a necessity when sculpting like this doing this
kind of work with a mouse is next to impossible.
I think you really do need something that you can draw with and has pressure sensitivity to it.
So I'm going to get out my pen here and I'm going to go to the clay strips brush first.
And the reason why I'm going to do this is I want to keep it very rough and not get into too much detail
at the beginning and I want to work on this chest area.
Now we can begin testing this and see how this works so you can see as I stroke on the character we
can lay down these kind of rough strips of clay.
I think I'd like the strength of mind to be a little bit more a little bit stronger.
You've got strength and radius over here and with these Sliders but you've also got the keyboard shortcut
keys of F which allows you to increase or decrease the size of your brush and also shift f allows you
to increase or decrease the strength of your brush.
So I'll put my strength right around here and click and I'll begin laying down some clay strips here.
So what I want to do is just kind of block out the rib cage of the character
think I'll go over to the character images view here.
I'll just begin blocking this out.
Now I can hide the arms here so they don't get in the way I want to just tumble around and I'm going
to press the H key on the keyboard and click and drag and hide the arm and then I'm going to press the
three key to come back to the side view here and I'll just begin blocking out where I think the rib
cage would be.
And I think it would probably be right around in here.
This spin around to the back side with control one on the front view here spin around to the back and
lay some down here as well.
Let's go back to the front view here.
And just build that out a little more so that's probably good enough for now.
Now this is all going to be very rough so bear with me here.
I'm going to press the shift key and smooth this back a little bit.
You can always press shift and smooth.
Anything you do.
The next thing I'm going to do is just block out the torso as well.
I'll go back to my default view.
Press Allt aches to bring the arm back.
And let's just block out the torso or the hips I mean and for this is just going to be a block
something like this
not going to work on the legs a bit.
What I want to do is create that teardrop shape for the thighs.
And I'll just begin sculpting this area in here.
Right in here.
So I'm going to try and build this up
for the thighs.
I want to block out the box of the knees.
So just maybe a box like this for the needs and I want to build up kind of an oval shape for the calves
as well back here.
So I'll come back here and begin somewhere around in here.
Building up an oval shaped for the Cavs.
There we go.
And I'll also do a little bit of work to build up the hamstrings as well.
So as you can see I'm just building up the major forms of of the character and I'm doing it in a very
rough kind of way at this point in time just worrying about the forms.
Not so much about the details we'll get to the details one of the biggest temptations is to begin working
on the details right up front.
And I would really suggest that you try and build up the rough forms first and then only after they're
all in place begin dealing with the details.
Also when it come over here and work on
but a bit just going to build this up a little bit more.
Now you can also cut in to speak in reverse or invert a tool by pressing the control key.
So instead of sculpting out or pulling out I can cut in to an area by holding the control key down.
So I want to build this up and kind of separate it from the hamstrings.
All right.
Well we're beginning to make some progress here we're blocking in the major forms of the character.
I know it doesn't look like much right now but this is really an important part of the process is to
build up the fundamental forms first before we jump into the details.